doc/website/blog: webapp with ent (#3351)
ent/ent: doc/website/blog/2023-02-23-simple-cms-with-ent.mdx

---

> title: A beginners guide to creating a web-app in Go using Ent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: A beginner's guide to creating a web-app in Go using Ent
```

authorTwitter: _rtam
image: "https://entgo.io/images/assets/entviz-v2.png"
---

import InstallationInstructions from '../../md/components/_installation_instructions.mdx';

[Ent](https://entgo.io) is an open-source entity framework for Go. It is similar to more traditional ORMs, but has a 
few distinct features that have made it very popular in the Go community. Ent was first open-sourced by
[Ariel](https://github.com/a8m) in 2019, when he was working at Facebook. Ent grew from the pains of managing the 
development of applications with very large and complex data models and ran successfully inside Facebook for a year 
before open-sourcing it.  After graduating from Facebook Open-source, Ent joined the Linux Foundation in September 2021.

Over the last few years, Ent has become one of the fastest growing ORMs in Go:

![](https://entgo.io/images/assets/cms-blog/oss-insight.png)

Some of Ent's most cited features are:

* **A type-safe Go API for working with your database.** Forget about using `interface{}` or reflection to work with 
  your database. Use pure Go that your editor understands and your compiler enforces.
  ![](https://entgo.io/images/assets/cms-blog/static.gif)

> * **Model your data in graph semantics** - Ent uses graph semantics to model your applications data. This makes it very easy to traverse complex datasets in a simple API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Model your data in graph semantics** - Ent uses graph semantics to model your application's data. This makes it very easy to traverse complex datasets in a simple API.
```

  Let’s say we want to get all users that are in groups that are about dogs. Here are two ways to write something like this with Ent:

  ```go
  // Start traversing from the topic.
  client.Topic.Query().
      Where(topic.Name("dogs")).
      QueryGroups().
      QueryUsers().
      All(ctx)
  
  // OR: Start traversing from the users and filter.
  client.User.Query().
      Where(		
          user.HasGroupsWith(  
              group.HasTopicsWith(  
                  topic.Name("dogs"),  
              ),  
          ),
      ).
      All(ctx)
  ```

* **Automatically generate servers** - whether you need GraphQL, gRPC or an OpenAPI compliant API layer, Ent can 
  generate the necessary code you need to create a performant server on top of your database. Ent will generate

>   both the third-party schemas (GraphQL types, Protobuf messages, etc) and well optimized code for the repetitive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  both the third-party schemas (GraphQL types, Protobuf messages, etc.) and optimized code for the repetitive
```

  tasks for reading and writing from the database.
* **Bundled with Atlas** - Ent is built with a rich integration with [Atlas](https://atlasgo.io), a robust schema 
  management tool with many advanced capabilities.  Atlas can automatically plan schema migrations for you as
  well as verify them in CI or deploy them to production for you. (Full disclosure: Ariel and I are the creators and maintainers)

> This tutorial is intended for Ent and Go novices who want to start by building a simple project: a very simple content management system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial is intended for Ent and Go novices who want to start by building a simple project: a very minimal content management system.
```

#### Prerequisities
* [Install Go](https://go.dev/doc/install)
* [Install Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)

:::info Supporting repo

You can find of the code shown in this tutorial in [this repo](https://github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example)

:::

### Step 1: Setting up the database schema

You can find the code described in this step in [this commit](https://github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/commit/d4e4916231f05aa9a4b9ce93e75afdb72ab25799).

Let's start by initializing our project using `go mod init`:
```
go mod init github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example
```

Go confirms our new module was created:
```
go: creating new go.mod: module github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example
```

> The first thing we will handle in our demo project will be to setup our database. We create our application data modelu using Ent. Let's fetch it using `go get`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first thing we will handle in our demo project will be to setup our database. We create our application data model using Ent. Let's fetch it using `go get`:
```

```
go get -u entgo.io/ent@master
```

> Once installed, we can use the Ent CLI to Initialize the models for the two types entities we will be dealing with in this tutorial, the `User` and the `Post`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once installed, we can use the Ent CLI to initialize the models for the two types of entities we will be dealing with in this tutorial: the `User` and the `Post`.
```

```
go run -mod=mod entgo.io/ent/cmd/ent new User Post
```

Notice that a few files are created:

```
.
`-- ent
    |-- generate.go
    `-- schema
        |-- post.go
        `-- user.go

2 directories, 3 files
```

Ent created the basic structure for our project:
* `generate.go` - we will see in a bit how this file is used to invoke Ent's code-generation engine.
* The `schema` directory, with a bare `ent.Schema` for each of the entities we requested.

Let's continue by defining the schema for our entities. This is the schema definition for `User`:
```go
// Fields of the User.  
func (User) Fields() []ent.Field {  
   return []ent.Field{  
      field.String("name"),  
      field.String("email").Unique(),  
      field.Time("created_at").Default(time.Now()),  
   }  
}  
  
// Edges of the User.  
func (User) Edges() []ent.Edge {  
   return []ent.Edge{  
      edge.To("posts", Post.Type),  
   }  
}
```

> Observe that we defined 3 fields, `name`, `email` and `created_at` (which takes the default value of `time.Now()`).  Since we expect emails to be unique in our system we added that constraint on the `email` field.  In addition, we defined an edge named `posts` to the `Post` type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Observe that we defined three fields: `name`, `email` and `created_at` (which takes the default value of `time.Now()`).  Since we expect emails to be unique in our system, we added that constraint on the `email` field.  In addition, we defined an edge named `posts` to the `Post` type.
```

Reviewer: Maybe also give a short brief about what an edge is?

```go
// Post holds the schema definition for the Post entity.
type Post struct {  
   ent.Schema  
}  
  
// Fields of the Post.  
func (Post) Fields() []ent.Field {  
   return []ent.Field{  
      field.String("title"),  
      field.Text("body"),  
      field.Time("created_at").Default(time.Now),  
   }  
}  
  
// Edges of the Post.func (Post) Edges() []ent.Edge {  
   return []ent.Edge{  
      edge.From("author", User.Type).  
         Unique().  
         Ref("posts"),  
   }  
}
```

On the `Post` schema, we defined 3 fields as well: `title`, `body` and `created_at`. In addition, we  defined an edge named `author` from `Post` to the `User` entity. We marked this edge as `Unique` because in our budding system, each post can have only one author. We used `Ref` to tell Ent that this edge's back reference is the `posts` edge on the `User`.

> Ent's power stems from it's code-generation engine. The way developing with Ent works is that whenever we make any change to our application schema, we must invoke Ent's code-gen engine to regenerate our database access code. This is what allows Ent to maintain a type-safe and efficient Go API for us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ent's power stems from it's code-generation engine. When developing with Ent, whenever we make any change to our application schema, we must invoke Ent's code-gen engine to regenerate our database access code. This is what allows Ent to maintain a type-safe and efficient Go API for us.
```

Let's see this in action, run:
```
go generate ./...
```

Observe that a whole *lot* of new Go files were created for us:

```
.
`-- ent
    |-- client.go
    |-- context.go
    |-- ent.go
    |-- enttest
    |   `-- enttest.go
/// .. Truncated for brevity 
    |-- user_query.go
    `-- user_update.go

9 directories, 29 files
```

:::info
If you're interested to see what the actual database schema for our application looks like, you can use a useful tool called `entviz`, to generate it:
```
go run -mod=mod ariga.io/entviz ./ent/schema
```
To view the result, [click here](https://gh.atlasgo.cloud/explore/a0e79415).
:::

> Once we have our data model defined. Let's create the database schema for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we have our data model defined, let's create the database schema for it.
```

  --url mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/test
```
Atlas reports that it successfully created the tables:
```
Migrating to version 20230220115943 (1 migrations in total):

  -- migrating version 20230220115943
    -> CREATE TABLE `users` (`id` bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT, `name` varchar(255) NOT NULL, `email` varchar(255) NOT NULL, `created_at` timestamp NOT NULL, PRIMARY KEY (`id`), UNIQUE INDEX `email` (`email`)) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_bin;
    -> CREATE TABLE `posts` (`id` bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT, `title` varchar(255) NOT NULL, `body` longtext NOT NULL, `created_at` timestamp NOT NULL, `post_author` bigint NULL, PRIMARY KEY (`id`), INDEX `posts_users_author` (`post_author`), CONSTRAINT `posts_users_author` FOREIGN KEY (`post_author`) REFERENCES `users` (`id`) ON UPDATE NO ACTION ON DELETE SET NULL) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_bin;
  -- ok (55.972329ms)

  -------------------------
  -- 67.18167ms
  -- 1 migrations 
  -- 2 sql statements

```

### Step 2: Seeding our database

:::info

The code for this step can be found in [this commit](https://github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/commit/eae0c881a4edfbe04e6aa074d4c165e8ff3656b1).

:::

> While we are developing our content management system, it would be sad to load a web page for our system and not see content for it. Let's start by seeding some data into our database and learn some Ent concepts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While we are developing our content management system, it would be sad to load a web page for our system and not see content for it. Let's start by seeding data into our database and learn some Ent concepts.
```

	// If not, create the user.
	case ent.IsNotFound(err):
		r, err = client.User.Create().
			SetName("rotemtam").
			SetEmail("r@hello.world").
			Save(ctx)
		if err != nil {
			return fmt.Errorf("failed creating user: %v", err)
		}
	case err != nil:
		return fmt.Errorf("failed querying user: %v", err)
	}
	// Finally, create a "Hello, world" blogpost.
	return client.Post.Create().
		SetTitle("Hello, World!").
		SetBody("This is my first post").
		SetAuthor(r).
		Exec(ctx)
}
```

As you can see, this program first checks if any `Post` entity exists in the database, if it does not it invokes the `seed` function. This function uses Ent to retrieve the user named `rotemtam` from the database and in case it does not exist, tries to create it. Finally, the function creates a blog post with this user as its author.

Run it:
```
 go run main.go -dsn "root:pass@tcp(localhost:3306)/test?parseTime=true"
```

### Step 3: Creating the home page

:::info
The code described in this step can be found in [this commit](https://github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/commit/8196bb50400bbaed53d5a722e987fcd50ea1628f)
:::

Let's now create the home page of the blog. This will consist of a few parts:

> 1. The view - this is a go html/template that renders the actual HTML the user will see.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The view - this is a Go html/template that renders the actual HTML the user will see.
```

> 2. The server code - this contains the HTTP request handlers that our users' browsers will communicate with and that will render our templates with data they retrieve from the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The server code - this contains the HTTP request handlers that our users' browsers will communicate with and will render our templates with data they retrieve from the database.
```

    <header class="d-flex align-items-center pb-3 mb-5 border-bottom">
        <a href="/" class="d-flex align-items-center text-dark text-decoration-none">
            <span class="fs-4">Ent Blog Demo</span>
        </a>
    </header>

    <main>
        <div class="row g-5">
            <div class="col-md-12">
                {{- range . }}
                    <h2>{{ .Title }}</h2>
                    <p>
                        {{ .CreatedAt.Format "2006-01-02" }} by {{ .Edges.Author.Name }}
                    </p>
                    <p>
                        {{ .Body }}
                    </p>
                {{- end }}
            </div>

        </div>
    </main>
    <footer class="pt-5 my-5 text-muted border-top">
        <p>
            This is the Ent Blog Demo. It is a simple blog application built with Ent and Go. Get started:
        </p>
        <pre>go get entgo.io/ent</pre>
    </footer>
</div>

<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@5.3.0-alpha1/dist/js/bootstrap.bundle.min.js"
        integrity="sha384-w76AqPfDkMBDXo30jS1Sgez6pr3x5MlQ1ZAGC+nuZB+EYdgRZgiwxhTBTkF7CXvN"
        crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
</body>
</html>
```

> Here we are using modified version of the [Bootstrap Starter Template](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.3/examples/starter-template/) as the basis of our UI. Let's highlight the important parts. As you will see below, in our `index` handler, we pass to will pass this template a slice of `Post` objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we are using a modified version of the [Bootstrap Starter Template](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.3/examples/starter-template/) as the basis of our UI. Let's highlight the important parts. As you will see below, in our `index` handler, we will pass this template a slice of `Post` objects.
```

Inside the Go-template, whatever we pass to it as data is available as "`.`", this explains this line, where we use `range` to iterate over each post:
```
{{- range . }}
```
Next, we print the title, creation time and the author name, via the `Author` edge:
```
<h2>{{ .Title }}</h2>
<p>
	{{ .CreatedAt.Format "2006-01-02" }} by {{ .Edges.Author.Name }}
</p>
```

> Finally, we print the post body, and close the loop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we print the post body and close the loop.
```

```
	<p>
		{{ .Body }}
	</p>
{{- end }}
```

> After defining the template, we need to make it available to our program, we embed this template into our binary using the `embed` package ([docs](https://pkg.go.dev/embed)):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After defining the template, we need to make it available to our program. We embed this template into our binary using the `embed` package ([docs](https://pkg.go.dev/embed)):
```

```go
type server struct {
	client *ent.Client
}

func newServer(client *ent.Client) *server {
	return &server{client: client}
}

```

Next, let's define the handler for our blog home page. This page should contain a list of all available blog posts:

```go
// index serves the blog home page
func (s *server) index(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	posts, err := s.client.Post.
		Query().
		WithAuthor().
		All(r.Context())
	if err != nil {
		http.Error(w, err.Error(), http.StatusInternalServerError)
		return
	}
	if err := tmpl.Execute(w, posts); err != nil {
		http.Error(w, err.Error(), http.StatusInternalServerError)
		return
	}
}
```

Let's zoom in on the Ent code here that is used to retrieve the posts from the database:
```go
// s.client.Post contains methods for interacting with Post entities
s.client.Post.
	// Begin a query.
	Query().
	// Retrieve the entities using the `Author` edge. (a `User` instance)
	WithAuthor().
	// Run the query against the database using the request context.
	All(r.Context())
```

#### The router

> To manage the routes for our application, let's use `go-chi` a popular routing library for Go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To manage the routes for our application, let's use `go-chi`, a popular routing library for Go.
```

Reviewer: Link?

```
go get -u github.com/go-chi/chi/v5
```

We define the `newRouter` function that sets up our router:

```go
// newRouter creates a new router with the blog handlers mounted.
func newRouter(srv *server) chi.Router {
	r := chi.NewRouter()
	r.Use(middleware.Logger)
	r.Use(middleware.Recoverer)
	r.Get("/", srv.index)
	return r
}
```

In this function, we first instantiate a new `chi.Router`, then register two middlewares:

> * `middleware.Logger` - is a basic access logger that prints out some information on every request our server handles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `middleware.Logger` is a basic access logger that prints out some information on every request our server handles.
```

> * `middleware.Recoverer` recovers from if our handlers panic, preventing a cause where our entire server will crash because of an application error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `middleware.Recoverer` recovers from when our handlers panic, preventing a case where our entire server will crash because of an application error.
```

Finally, we register the `index` function of the `server` struct to handle `GET` requests to the `/` path of our server.

#### A unit test

Before wiring everything together, let's write a simple unit test to check that our code works as expected.

> To simplify our tests we will install the SQLite driver for Go which allows us to use an in memory database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To simplify our tests we will install the SQLite driver for Go which allows us to use an in-memory database:
```

```
go get -u github.com/mattn/go-sqlite3
```

> Next, we install `testify`, a utility library that is commonly used for writing assertions in tests.

Reviewer: Link here too?

?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/predicate      [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/runtime        [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/schema [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/user   [no test files]

```

#### Putting everything together

Finally, let's update our `main` function to put everything together:

```go
func main() {  
   // Read the connection string to the database from a CLI flag.  
   var dsn string  
   flag.StringVar(&dsn, "dsn", "", "database DSN")  
   flag.Parse()  
  
   // Instantiate the Ent client.  
   client, err := ent.Open("mysql", dsn)  
   if err != nil {  
      log.Fatalf("failed connecting to mysql: %v", err)  
   }  
   defer client.Close()  
  
   ctx := context.Background()  
   // If we don't have any posts yet, seed the database.  
   if !client.Post.Query().ExistX(ctx) {  
      if err := seed(ctx, client); err != nil {  
         log.Fatalf("failed seeding the database: %v", err)  
      }  
   }  
   srv := newServer(client)  
   r := newRouter(srv)  
   log.Fatal(http.ListenAndServe(":8080", r))  
}
```

> We can now run our application and stand amazed at our achievement, a working blog front page!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now run our application and stand amazed at our achievement: a working blog front page!
```

```
 go run main.go -dsn "root:pass@tcp(localhost:3306)/test?parseTime=true"
```

![](https://entgo.io/images/assets/cms-blog/cms-01.png)

### Step 4: Adding content

> You can follow the changes in this step in [this commit](https://github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/commit/2e412ab2cda0fd251ccb512099b802174d917511).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info 
You can follow the changes in this step in [this commit](https://github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/commit/2e412ab2cda0fd251ccb512099b802174d917511).
:::
```

> No content mangement system would be complete without the ability, well, to manage content. Let's now demonstrate how we can add support for publishing new posts on our blog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No content mangement system would be complete without the ability, well, to manage content. Let's demonstrate how we can add support for publishing new posts on our blog.
```

Let's start by creating the backend handler:
```go
// add creates a new blog post.
func (s *server) add(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	author, err := s.client.User.Query().Only(r.Context())
	if err != nil {
		http.Error(w, err.Error(), http.StatusInternalServerError)
		return
	}
	if err := s.client.Post.Create().
		SetTitle(r.FormValue("title")).
		SetBody(r.FormValue("body")).
		SetAuthor(author).
		Exec(r.Context()); err != nil {
		http.Error(w, err.Error(), http.StatusInternalServerError)
	}
	http.Redirect(w, r, "/", http.StatusFound)
}
```
As you can see, the handler currently loads the *only* user from the `users` table (since we have yet to create a user management system or login capabilities). `Only` will fail unless exactly one result is retrieved from the database.

> Next, our handler creates a new post, using setting the title and body fields to values retrieved from `r.FormValue`, this is where Go stores all of the form input passed to an HTTP request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, our handler creates a new post, by setting the title and body fields to values retrieved from `r.FormValue`. This is where Go stores all of the form input passed to an HTTP request.
```

Reviewer: Maybe I'd write "This field is where Go stores.."

After creating the handler, we should wire it to our router:
```go
// newRouter creates a new router with the blog handlers mounted.
func newRouter(srv *server) chi.Router {
	r := chi.NewRouter()
	r.Use(middleware.Logger)
	r.Use(middleware.Recoverer)
	r.Get("/", srv.index)
	// highlight-next-line
	r.Post("/add", srv.add)
	return r
}
```
Next, we can add an HTML `<form>` component that will be used by our user to write their content:
```html
<div class="col-md-12">
	<hr/>
	<h2>Create a new post</h2>
	<form action="/add" method="post">
		<div class="mb-3">
			<label for="title" class="form-label">Title</label>
			<input name="title" type="text" class="form-control" id="title" placeholder="Once upon a time..">
		</div>
		<div class="mb-3">
			<label for="body" class="form-label">Body</label>
			<textarea name="body" class="form-control" id="body" rows="8"></textarea>
		</div>
		<div class="mb-3">
			<button type="submit" class="btn btn-primary mb-3">Post</button>
		</div>
	</form>
</div>
```

> Also, let's add a nice touch, where we display the blog posts from new to old. To do this, modify the `index` handler to order the posts in a descending order using the `created_at` column:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, let's add a nice touch, where we display the blog posts from newest to oldest. To do this, modify the `index` handler to order the posts in a descending order using the `created_at` column:
```

	require.Equal(t, http.StatusOK, resp.StatusCode)

	body, err := io.ReadAll(resp.Body)
	require.NoError(t, err)
	
	// The home page should contain our new post.
	require.Contains(t, string(body), "This is a test")
}
```

Let's run the test:
```
go test ./...
```

And everything works!

```
ok      github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example    0.493s
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent        [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/enttest        [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/hook   [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/migrate        [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/post   [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/predicate      [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/runtime        [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/schema [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/user   [no test files]

```

A passing unit test is great, but let's verify our changes visually:

![](https://entgo.io/images/assets/cms-blog/cms-02.png)

> Our form appears, great. After submitting it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our form appears - great! After submitting it:
```

development of applications with very large and complex data models and ran successfully inside Facebook for a year 
before open-sourcing it.  After graduating from Facebook Open-source, Ent joined the Linux Foundation in September 2021.

Over the last few years, Ent has become one of the fastest growing ORMs in Go:

![](https://entgo.io/images/assets/cms-blog/oss-insight.png)

Some of Ent's most cited features are:

* **A type-safe Go API for working with your database.** Forget about using `interface{}` or reflection to work with 
  your database. Use pure Go that your editor understands and your compiler enforces.
  ![](https://entgo.io/images/assets/cms-blog/static.gif)
* **Model your data in graph semantics** - Ent uses graph semantics to model your application's data. This makes it very easy to traverse complex datasets in a simple API.

  Let’s say we want to get all users that are in groups that are about dogs. Here are two ways to write something like this with Ent:

  ```go
  // Start traversing from the topic.
  client.Topic.Query().
      Where(topic.Name("dogs")).

>       QueryGroups().

Author: The point is to demonstrate traversals

#### Prerequisities
* [Install Go](https://go.dev/doc/install)
* [Install Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)

:::info Supporting repo

You can find of the code shown in this tutorial in [this repo](https://github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example)

:::

### Step 1: Setting up the database schema

You can find the code described in this step in [this commit](https://github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/commit/d4e4916231f05aa9a4b9ce93e75afdb72ab25799).

Let's start by initializing our project using `go mod init`:
```
go mod init github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example
```

Go confirms our new module was created:
```
go: creating new go.mod: module github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example
```

The first thing we will handle in our demo project will be to setup our database. We create our application data model using Ent. Let's fetch it using `go get`:

```
go get -u entgo.io/ent@master
```

Once installed, we can use the Ent CLI to Initialize the models for the two types entities we will be dealing with in this tutorial, the `User` and the `Post`.
```
go run -mod=mod entgo.io/ent/cmd/ent new User Post
```

> Notice that a few files are created:

Author: Already use observe enough in this post, notice is also correct.

```
.
`-- ent
    |-- generate.go
    `-- schema
        |-- post.go
        `-- user.go

2 directories, 3 files
```

Ent created the basic structure for our project:
* `generate.go` - we will see in a bit how this file is used to invoke Ent's code-generation engine.
* The `schema` directory, with a bare `ent.Schema` for each of the entities we requested.

Let's continue by defining the schema for our entities. This is the schema definition for `User`:
```go
// Fields of the User.  
func (User) Fields() []ent.Field {  
   return []ent.Field{  
      field.String("name"),  

>       field.String("email").Unique(),  
>       field.Time("created_at").Default(time.Now()),  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      field.String("email").
            Unique(),  
      field.Time("created_at").
            Default(time.Now),  
```

   }  
}  
  
// Edges of the User.  
func (User) Edges() []ent.Edge {  
   return []ent.Edge{  
      edge.To("posts", Post.Type),  
   }  
}
```

Observe that we defined 3 fields, `name`, `email` and `created_at` (which takes the default value of `time.Now()`).  Since we expect emails to be unique in our system we added that constraint on the `email` field.  In addition, we defined an edge named `posts` to the `Post` type.

```go
// Post holds the schema definition for the Post entity.
type Post struct {  
   ent.Schema  
}  
  
// Fields of the Post.  
func (Post) Fields() []ent.Field {  
   return []ent.Field{  
      field.String("title"),  
      field.Text("body"),  

>       field.Time("created_at").Default(time.Now),  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      field.Time("created_at").
            Default(time.Now),  
```

    -> CREATE TABLE `posts` (`id` bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT, `title` varchar(255) NOT NULL, `body` longtext NOT NULL, `created_at` timestamp NOT NULL, `post_author` bigint NULL, PRIMARY KEY (`id`), INDEX `posts_users_author` (`post_author`), CONSTRAINT `posts_users_author` FOREIGN KEY (`post_author`) REFERENCES `users` (`id`) ON UPDATE NO ACTION ON DELETE SET NULL) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_bin;
  -- ok (55.972329ms)

  -------------------------
  -- 67.18167ms
  -- 1 migrations 
  -- 2 sql statements

```

### Step 2: Seeding our database

:::info

The code for this step can be found in [this commit](https://github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/commit/eae0c881a4edfbe04e6aa074d4c165e8ff3656b1).

:::

While we are developing our content management system, it would be sad to load a web page for our system and not see content for it. Let's start by seeding data into our database and learn some Ent concepts.

To access our local MySQL database, we need a driver for it, use `go get` to fetch it:
```
go get -u github.com/go-sql-driver/mysql
```

Create a file named `main.go` and add this basic seeding script.

```go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"flag"
	"fmt"
	"log"

> 	"github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent"
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	"github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent"
```

	_ "github.com/go-sql-driver/mysql"
	"github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/user"
)

func main() {
	// Read the connection string to the database from a CLI flag.
	var dsn string
	flag.StringVar(&dsn, "dsn", "", "database DSN")
	flag.Parse()

	// Instantiate the Ent client.
	client, err := ent.Open("mysql", dsn)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf("failed connecting to mysql: %v", err)
	}
	defer client.Close()

	ctx := context.Background()
	// If we don't have any posts yet, seed the database.
	if !client.Post.Query().ExistX(ctx) {
		if err := seed(ctx, client); err != nil {

> 			log.Fatalf("failed seeding the database: %v", err)

Author: But the program should fail (with a non zero status code) ..

		Where(
			user.Name("rotemtam"),
		).
		Only(ctx)
	switch {
	// If not, create the user.
	case ent.IsNotFound(err):
		r, err = client.User.Create().
			SetName("rotemtam").
			SetEmail("r@hello.world").
			Save(ctx)
		if err != nil {
			return fmt.Errorf("failed creating user: %v", err)
		}
	case err != nil:
		return fmt.Errorf("failed querying user: %v", err)
	}
	// Finally, create a "Hello, world" blogpost.
	return client.Post.Create().
		SetTitle("Hello, World!").
		SetBody("This is my first post").
		SetAuthor(r).
		Exec(ctx)
}
```

As you can see, this program first checks if any `Post` entity exists in the database, if it does not it invokes the `seed` function. This function uses Ent to retrieve the user named `rotemtam` from the database and in case it does not exist, tries to create it. Finally, the function creates a blog post with this user as its author.

Run it:
```
 go run main.go -dsn "root:pass@tcp(localhost:3306)/test?parseTime=true"
```

### Step 3: Creating the home page

:::info
The code described in this step can be found in [this commit](https://github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/commit/8196bb50400bbaed53d5a722e987fcd50ea1628f)
:::

> Let's now create the home page of the blog. This will consist of a few parts:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, let's create the home page of the blog. This will consist of a few parts:
```

1. The view - this is a Go html/template that renders the actual HTML the user will see.
2. The server code - this contains the HTTP request handlers that our users' browsers will communicate with and will render our templates with data they retrieve from the database.
3. The router - registers different paths to handlers.

> 4. A unit test - to verify our server behaves correctly.

Reviewer 3: The other bullets always had the first part bold.

After defining the template, we need to make it available to our program. We embed this template into our binary using the `embed` package ([docs](https://pkg.go.dev/embed)):

```go
var (  
   //go:embed templates/*   
   resources embed.FS  
   tmpl      = template.Must(template.ParseFS(resources, "templates/*"))  
)
```

#### Server code

We continue by defining a type named `server` and a constructor for it, `newServer`. This struct will have receiver methods for each HTTP handler we create and binds the Ent client we created at init to the server code.
```go
type server struct {
	client *ent.Client
}

func newServer(client *ent.Client) *server {
	return &server{client: client}
}

```

Next, let's define the handler for our blog home page. This page should contain a list of all available blog posts:

```go
// index serves the blog home page
func (s *server) index(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	posts, err := s.client.Post.
		Query().
		WithAuthor().
		All(r.Context())
	if err != nil {
		http.Error(w, err.Error(), http.StatusInternalServerError)
		return
	}
	if err := tmpl.Execute(w, posts); err != nil {
		http.Error(w, err.Error(), http.StatusInternalServerError)

> 		return

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

	}
}
```

Let's zoom in on the Ent code here that is used to retrieve the posts from the database:
```go
// s.client.Post contains methods for interacting with Post entities
s.client.Post.
	// Begin a query.
	Query().
	// Retrieve the entities using the `Author` edge. (a `User` instance)
	WithAuthor().
	// Run the query against the database using the request context.
	All(r.Context())
```

#### The router

To manage the routes for our application, let's use `go-chi`, a popular routing library for Go.

```

> go get -u github.com/go-chi/chi/v5

Reviewer 3: :+1:

We define the `newRouter` function that sets up our router:

```go
// newRouter creates a new router with the blog handlers mounted.
func newRouter(srv *server) chi.Router {
	r := chi.NewRouter()
	r.Use(middleware.Logger)
	r.Use(middleware.Recoverer)
	r.Get("/", srv.index)
	return r
}
```

In this function, we first instantiate a new `chi.Router`, then register two middlewares:
* `middleware.Logger` is a basic access logger that prints out some information on every request our server handles.
* `middleware.Recoverer` recovers from when our handlers panic, preventing a case where our entire server will crash because of an application error.

Finally, we register the `index` function of the `server` struct to handle `GET` requests to the `/` path of our server.

#### A unit test

Before wiring everything together, let's write a simple unit test to check that our code works as expected.

To simplify our tests we will install the SQLite driver for Go which allows us to use an in-memory database:
```
go get -u github.com/mattn/go-sqlite3
```

Next, we install `testify`, a utility library that is commonly used for writing assertions in tests.

```
go get github.com/stretchr/testify 

> ```

Reviewer 3: Make this in one step.

Author: There's a sentence in between, I dont see why

With these dependencies installed, create a new file named `main_test.go`:

```go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"io"
	"net/http"
	"net/http/httptest"
	"testing"

	_ "github.com/mattn/go-sqlite3"
	"github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/enttest"
	"github.com/stretchr/testify/require"
)

func TestIndex(t *testing.T) {
	// Initialize an Ent client that uses an in memory SQLite db.
	client := enttest.Open(t, "sqlite3", "file:ent?mode=memory&cache=shared&_fk=1")
	defer client.Close()
	

> 	// seed the database with our "Hello, world" post and user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	// Seed the database with our "Hello, world" post and user.
```

> 	err := seed(context.Background(), client)
> 	require.NoError(t, err)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	require.NoError(t, seed(context.Background(), client))
```

Author: I actually prefer it this way. I don't think there's a benefit from condensing it to one line, if anything, its harder to read.

	// Initialize a server and router.

> 	srv := newServer(client)
> 	r := newRouter(srv)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
var (
	srv = newServer(client)
	r    = newRouter(srv)
)
```

?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/post   [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/predicate      [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/runtime        [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/schema [no test files]
?       github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/ent/user   [no test files]

```

#### Putting everything together

Finally, let's update our `main` function to put everything together:

```go
func main() {  
   // Read the connection string to the database from a CLI flag.  
   var dsn string  
   flag.StringVar(&dsn, "dsn", "", "database DSN")  
   flag.Parse()  
  
   // Instantiate the Ent client.  
   client, err := ent.Open("mysql", dsn)  
   if err != nil {  
      log.Fatalf("failed connecting to mysql: %v", err)  
   }  
   defer client.Close()  
  
   ctx := context.Background()  
   // If we don't have any posts yet, seed the database.  
   if !client.Post.Query().ExistX(ctx) {  
      if err := seed(ctx, client); err != nil {  
         log.Fatalf("failed seeding the database: %v", err)  
      }  
   }  

>    srv := newServer(client)  
>    r := newRouter(srv)  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
var (
   srv = newServer(client)  
   r     = newRouter(srv)  
)
```

>    log.Fatal(http.ListenAndServe(":8080", r))  

Reviewer 3: Again, `log.Fatal` will render the `defer` useless.

}
```

We can now run our application and stand amazed at our achievement: a working blog front page!

```
 go run main.go -dsn "root:pass@tcp(localhost:3306)/test?parseTime=true"
```

![](https://entgo.io/images/assets/cms-blog/cms-01.png)

### Step 4: Adding content

:::info 
You can follow the changes in this step in [this commit](https://github.com/rotemtam/ent-blog-example/commit/2e412ab2cda0fd251ccb512099b802174d917511).
:::

No content mangement system would be complete without the ability, well, to manage content. Let's demonstrate how we can add support for publishing new posts on our blog.

Let's start by creating the backend handler:
```go
// add creates a new blog post.
func (s *server) add(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	author, err := s.client.User.Query().Only(r.Context())
	if err != nil {
		http.Error(w, err.Error(), http.StatusInternalServerError)
		return
	}
	if err := s.client.Post.Create().
		SetTitle(r.FormValue("title")).

> 		SetBody(r.FormValue("body")).

Reviewer 3: Calling `FormValue` without  `ParseForm` will result in ignoring errors from the implicit call to  `ParseForm`. https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#Request.FormValue

Author: That's a fair point, I hadn't considered it. But I think its a bit "nitpicking" in the scope of this post

```html
<div class="col-md-12">
	<hr/>
	<h2>Create a new post</h2>
	<form action="/add" method="post">
		<div class="mb-3">
			<label for="title" class="form-label">Title</label>
			<input name="title" type="text" class="form-control" id="title" placeholder="Once upon a time..">
		</div>
		<div class="mb-3">
			<label for="body" class="form-label">Body</label>
			<textarea name="body" class="form-control" id="body" rows="8"></textarea>
		</div>
		<div class="mb-3">
			<button type="submit" class="btn btn-primary mb-3">Post</button>
		</div>
	</form>
</div>
```

Also, let's add a nice touch, where we display the blog posts from new to old. To do this, modify the `index` handler to order the posts in a descending order using the `created_at` column:
```go
posts, err := s.client.Post.
	Query().
	WithAuthor().
	// highlight-next-line
	Order(ent.Desc(post.FieldCreatedAt)).
	All(ctx)
```

Finally, let's add another unit test that verifies the add post flow works as expected:
```go
func TestAdd(t *testing.T) {
	client := enttest.Open(t, "sqlite3", "file:ent?mode=memory&cache=shared&_fk=1")
	defer client.Close()

> 	err := seed(context.Background(), client)
> 	require.NoError(t, err)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	require.NoError(t, seed(context.Background(), client))
```

	srv := newServer(client)

> 	r := newRouter(srv)

Reviewer 3: `var ()` block

	ts := httptest.NewServer(r)
	defer ts.Close()

	// Post the form.
	resp, err := ts.Client().PostForm(ts.URL+"/add", map[string][]string{
		"title": {"Testing, one, two."},
		"body":  {"This is a test"},
	})
	require.NoError(t, err)
	// We should be redirected to the index page and receive 200 OK.

> 	require.Equal(t, http.StatusOK, resp.StatusCode)

Reviewer 3: Will this really be green? You return a 302 form the handler, right?

Author: Test passes. Yes
